# Does Media Perception on Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare Influence User Sentiment on Incorporating Artificial Intelligence in Dermatological Care?

By: Audrey Zuckerman

05/11/21


Abstract

This paper will seek to understand the sentiments among social media users and their views on AI in dermatology. More specifically, are they comfortable with the technology, do they feel it will be helpful in their medical care, etc.? This study relies on a sentiment analysis to learn how audience members react to AI technology in dermatology. Sentiment analysis is helpful because it enlightens readers on the emotions people associate with the technology. 3rd sentence comes from findings. Fifty-four comments were analyzed from a U.S. News article: "AI Beats Doctors at Cancer Diagnoses" mentioned on Twitter (83% positive user sentiment). Another 54 comments were analyzed from a New York Times Article: "AI Could Worsen Health Disparities." The comments showed a breakdown of 39% mixed user sentiment, 28% negative user sentiment, and 29% positive user sentiment. Finally, the comments analyzed from a PROVEN Skincare Instagram post that featured Forbes article: "The Tesla Of Skincare Where Beauty Meets Technology," had an overwhelmingly 93% positive user sentiment and a 7% unsure user sentiment. The study demonstrates a correlation between AI technology in the media and whether articles discuss the potential benefits and risks of incorporating AI into healthcare technology and how a user will respond.

Introduction

There has been an increasing incidence of skin cancer and low awareness of this among the general population. There is an immediate need for the deployment of this technology to assist clinicians in dermatology. Many deep learning algorithms are being tested to distinguish malignant skin lesions from possible skin cancers (Goyal et al., 2020). AI can be used to change how patients engage in health care. Patients perceived benefits in health care efficiency and quality of care but perceived threats to their privacy and confidentiality, as well as their informed consent and autonomy (Nelson et al., 2020). Dr. Charu Sharma specializes in dermatology and has a dedicated interest in working in the hospital & health care. The beauty & wellness industry believes that acne is “one of the most common skin diseases affecting the majority of people, specifically teenagers.” Dr. Sharma believes that the first visible signs of acne start at adolescence due to hormonal changes, and the severity of acne increases depending on lifestyle, hygiene, and diet habits. Many people feel that their acne takes a toll on their emotional health. These individuals can develop depression, anxiety, and low self-esteem from untreated acne. Even if the acne itself diminishes over time, patients can develop acne scars that can last a lifetime if it is not addressed in its initial stages. Early diagnosis and continued maintenance, along with healthier lifestyle habits, can help improve acne. Because of their non-threatening nature, aesthetic acne conditions can be diagnosed and treated virtually. Breakthrough AI technology can be especially helpful in enhancing accuracy in diagnosing and treating acne (Allied Academics, 2019).

Research Questions

From this discussion, I have derived the following research questions: RQ1: What are the actual risks and benefits of incorporating AI technology into the field of dermatology? What are social media users saying online about this innovation?
RQ2: What are the perceived risks and benefits among patients of incorporating AI technology into their dermatological care? Are online sources paying attention to the perceived benefits of this technology or the perceived risks? RQ3: Do people feel more comfortable incorporating AI technology into their skincare regimen to improve their acne? Would patients trust a machine to diagnose and treat their acne more so than they would trust a machine to diagnose and treat skin cancers?

Methods

This study relies on a sentiment analysis to learn how audience members react to AI technology in dermatology. Sentiment analysis is helpful because it enlightens readers on the emotions people associate with the technology. The sentiment analysis seeks to uncover how people feel: do they think positively that AI in dermatology will be helpful for them, or do they associate this technology with negative emotions? If so, why? This is a suitable method for us to use, especially on social media. We can see a wide range of text that we can quantitatively analyze to look for trends in the data. This paper's methods are to code 54 comments from a New York Times opinion article that addresses the combined topics of artificial intelligence and healthcare disparities. I also will code 54 top tweets organized by the date it was posted that respond to a US News article published May 28, 2018: "AI Beats Doctors at Cancer Diagnoses." I examined sentiments that came up in the comments on the US News article on AI in dermatology and from the New York Times article, “AI Could Worsen Health Disparities.” Moving from AI use in skin cancer identification and treatment to AI use in skincare, the focus was primarily on what people were writing in the media about skincare companies that embraced AI technology. Style and Beauty contributor Joseph DeAcetis, who covers luxury fashion and beauty, wrote an article about PROVEN cosmetics titled “The Tesla of Skincare Where Beauty Meets Technology.” PROVEN posted the article on their Instagram page and I analyzed the 49 comments.

Findings & Conclusion

The results indicate that based on what was found from the US News Twitter comment sentiment analysis that a majority of users who tweeted the article reacted positively to the report, while a small percentage of users felt unsure about the technology, no user displayed negative or mixed emotions. The New York Times comment sentiment analysis results show that most commenters had mixed feelings when discussing AI technology in healthcare. Others felt positive about incorporating the technology into the healthcare industry, while an almost equal amount of people felt pessimistic about this introduction. The PROVEN Instagram comments sentiment analysis results show that most users reacted positively to incorporating AI into acne treatment and skincare lines. Only a tiny part of the population remained skeptical. The study demonstrates a correlation between AI technology in the media and whether articles discuss the potential benefits and risks of incorporating AI into healthcare technology and how a user will respond. A correlation showed that news articles that presented AI as groundbreaking technology and focused on its benefits (US News article & Forbes PROVEN article) generally had positive comments over social. The New York Times article that discussed the risks and limitations of AI in technology had a high amount of mixed reviews. Although there was a slight discrepancy between positive and negative comments for that article, it seemed that people automatically became more split on the issue by the writer questioning the technology. This data suggests that users will negatively think of AI and consider the risks of AI technology more frequently when the news outlet displays the technology in a negative light. For example, the New York Times article discussed the worsened healthcare disparities that would inevitably come with AI technology deployment into healthcare. Because of this, the users' comments reflected a highly mixed, highly negative, and yet surprisingly positive sentiment, further confirming that most reactions will be positive because humans quickly adapt to new technology. The data also suggests that users were commenting on AI deployment in skincare, specifically with acne care and not cancer care. Users reacted the most positively to the online sources that featured stories of AI deployment in skincare—further emphasizing the idea that users are more likely to accept AI in their aesthetic care than in their cancer care.

References

Allied Academics, Understanding acne - The use of technology powered by AI in diagnosing and treating acne patients. (2019, September 19). Retrieved from https://www.alliedacademies.org/proceedings/understanding-acne--the-use-of-technology-powered-by-ai-in-diagnosing-and-treating-acne-patients-5317.html

Goyal, M., Knackstedt, T., Yan, S., & Hassanpour, S. (2020). Artificial intelligence-based image classification methods for diagnosis of skin cancer: Challenges and opportunities. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 127. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.elon.edu/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2020.104065

Nelson, C.A., Pérez-Chada, Lourdes Maria, Creadore, A., Li, S.J., Lo, K., Manjaly, P., Pournamdari, A.B., Tkachenko, E., Barbieri, John S, Ko, Justin, Menon, A.V., Hartman, Rebecca Ivy, & Mostaghimi, Arash, (2020). Patient Perspectives on the Use of Artificial Intelligence for Skin Cancer Screening: A Qualitative Study. JAMA Dermatology, 156(5), 501. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.elon.edu/10.1001/jamadermatol.2019.5014
